Document steps to expose metrics for EKS-A components (#7970)
aws/eks-anywhere: docs/content/en/docs/clustermgmt/observability/expose-metrics.md

---

> title: "Expose metrics for EKS-A components"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Expose metrics for EKS Anywhere components"
```

linkTitle: "Expose metrics"
weight: 100
date: 2024-04-06
description: >

>   Expose metrics for EKS-A components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Expose metrics for EKS Anywhere components
```

---

> Some kubernetes system components like kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-proxy expose metrics only on the localhost by default. In order to expose metrics for these components so that other monitoring systems like Prometheus can scrape them, you need to deploy some proxy as a Daemonset on the host network. The proxy pods also need to be configured with control plane tolerations so that they can be scheduled on the control plane nodes.

Author: For kube proxy, daemonset also needs to be deployed on worker nodes as kube-proxy is itself a daemonset deployed on all nodes

> To configure a proxy for exposing metrics on an EKS-A cluster, you can perform the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure a proxy for exposing metrics on an EKS Anywhere cluster, you can perform the following steps:
```

> 1.  Create a new cluster role for the client to access the metrics endpoint of the components.

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this? I understand the user needs it, but why is it needed to deploy the proxy?

Author: It's not required to deploy the proxy. I will move it to another section

    ```bash
    cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
    kind: ClusterRole
    metadata:
      name: metrics-reader
    rules:
      - nonResourceURLs:
          - "/metrics"
        verbs:
          - get
    EOF
    ```

2.  Create a new cluster role binding to bind the above cluster role to the client pod's service account.
    

>     Below is an example cluster role binding if you use prometheus as the client to scrape metrics.

Reviewer 2: same here. Do we need to include this in our doc? This should be part of the "scraper" docs, right?

Author: Yes, moved it to another sub-section

    ```bash
    cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
    kind: ClusterRoleBinding
    metadata:
      name: metrics-reader-binding
    subjects:
    - kind: ServiceAccount
      name: prometheus-server
      namespace: observability
    roleRef:
      kind: ClusterRole
      name: metrics-reader
      apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
    EOF
    ```

> 3.  Create a config map to store the proxy configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Create a ConfigMap to store the proxy configuration.
```

>     Below is an example config map if you use HAProxy as the proxy server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Below is an example ConfigMap if you use HAProxy as the proxy server.
```

    ```bash
    cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: metrics-proxy
    data:
      haproxy.cfg: |
        defaults
          mode http
          timeout connect 5000ms
          timeout client 5000ms
          timeout server 5000ms
          default-server maxconn 10

        frontend kube-proxy
          bind ${NODE_IP}:10249
          http-request deny if !{ path /metrics }
          default_backend kube-proxy
        backend kube-proxy
          server kube-proxy 127.0.0.1:10249 check

        frontend kube-controller-manager
          bind ${NODE_IP}:10257
          http-request deny if !{ path /metrics }
          default_backend kube-controller-manager
        backend kube-controller-manager
          server kube-controller-manager 127.0.0.1:10257 ssl verify none check

        frontend kube-scheduler
          bind ${NODE_IP}:10259
          http-request deny if !{ path /metrics }
          default_backend kube-scheduler
        backend kube-scheduler
          server kube-scheduler 127.0.0.1:10259 ssl verify none check
    EOF
    ```

> 4.  Create a daemonset for the proxy and mount the config map volume onto the proxy pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.  Create a Daemonset for the proxy and mount the ConfigMap volume onto the proxy pods.
```

>     Below is an example configuration for the HAProxy daemonset.

Reviewer 2: I would omit this sentence. Or just add all of this under a subsection (##HAProxy)

    ```bash
    cat << EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: DaemonSet
    metadata:
      name: metrics-proxy
    spec:
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          app: metrics-proxy
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app: metrics-proxy
        spec:
          tolerations:
          - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane
            operator: Exists
            effect: NoSchedule
          hostNetwork: true
          containers:
            - name: haproxy

>               image: haproxy:2.9

Reviewer 3: We should suggest the ECR public mirror as it's a Docker official image - https://gallery.ecr.aws/docker/library/haproxy

>               image: public.ecr.aws/docker/library/haproxy:latest

Reviewer 4: lets use the eksa built image: `public.ecr.aws/eks-anywhere/kubernetes-sigs/kind/haproxy:v0.20.0-eks-a-54`

              env:
                - name: NODE_IP
                  valueFrom:
                    fieldRef:
                      apiVersion: v1
                      fieldPath: status.hostIP
                - name: TOKEN

>                   value: "$(cat /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token)"

Reviewer 2: Could you help me understand a bit more how this works? Why do we need a service account token in the haproxy pod? What service account is this supposed to be?

Author: You are right. This token is not required for the proxy

              ports:
                - name: kube-proxy
                  containerPort: 10249
                - name: kube-ctrl-mgr
                  containerPort: 10257
                - name: kube-scheduler
                  containerPort: 10259
              volumeMounts:
                - mountPath: "/usr/local/etc/haproxy"
                  name: haproxy-config
          volumes:
            - configMap:
                name: metrics-proxy
              name: haproxy-config
    EOF
    ```

5.  Verify that the metrics are exposed to the client pods by running the following commands:
    ```bash
    kubectl exec -it {client-pod-name} -n {client-pod-namespace} -- bash
    export TOKEN=$(cat /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token)

>     curl -H "Authorization: Bearer ${TOKEN}" http://{node-IP}:{component-port}/metrics

Reviewer 2: nit: it would be better if you gave an example that worked out of the box, using an ephemeral container with `kubectl debug` or simply a `kubectl run`.

Author: I have updated the docs to have the client permissions configuration steps in a separate subsection. I think it should be fine to continue with the current example in the context of that subsection.
